How to get these youngsters to study properly, the percent of A's and B's in that class, total A's and B's went up to around 70%.
There were some kids, no matter what I did, that didn't seem to do any good, but the majority of them got the message, and then they found out an interesting thing.
People over that were on the admissions committee in the College of Veterinary Medicine were good friends of mine.
And I was told by the chairman of that committee one day that we don't care much what
grades these kids who are applying to vet school has if they can make an A or a B in your course, almost guaranteed admission.
And these kids recognized, gee, if we can make a B in this course, we can probably get in vet school.
And they went to work.
And the last five years was really a fun time.
Which of all the courses you taught, which one did you enjoy most?
That's a tough question to answer.
I'm an organic chemist and any organic chemistry absolutely fascinates me, whether it's an undergraduate or graduate organic course.
But I like other
Types of chemistry too.
I like freshman chemistry.
It was a frustrating course back in the days when I taught it because we didn't have good students and the core was just causing all kinds of troubles.
Let's see.
Somewhere I remember you invented skunk oil.
Is that what you called it?
Yeah, it's synthetic skunk scent is what it is.
How did you find that out?
Oh, I remember how and when did you develop that?
Well, I have this ranch out at Bernie.
I say I have it.
It doesn't belong to me at all.
My wife had an uncle and aunt who owned this place, and they used to invite us out there every Thanksgiving because I enjoyed hunting.
And her uncle was one of the strangest boys I've ever seen.
And he didn't like just a lot of people, but he loved Edith.
And she was his niece by marriage.
His wife was Edith's.
dead sister, so they were no blood kin, but Robert Raglin was his name.
His wife had a sudden heart attack out there, and they had no children.
That really hurt him badly.
Then he came down with lung cancer because he was a chain smoker.
We went out there one day, the last time we saw him out there at the ranch,
pretty sick, and he said, I've got the well all fixed up, I've got everything else working fine, and I want you to have the place.
When did you start working on the skunk oil?
Well, coming up to that.
Now he worked out some sort of a deal.
She paid him a dollar or something like that, you know.
I'm not sure it was legal, but he said if the IRS doesn't contact you in five years, you've got it made and nothing happened.
So it's all needed to her, and I kid her every now and then, I don't own a single acre of it.
But it's full of white-tailed deer and all kinds of other animals.
And so a friend of mine, a bow hunter friend of mine, came to me one day and said, Tex, know you like to hunt.
I'll tell you how to really be a better hunter.
And I said, how you do it?
And I said, you just go out and drive up and down country roads and find dead skunks and take this vile-smelling juice out of their anal gland and bottle it up and put it downwind of you when you go hunting.
And you won't have to smell it when it's downwind of you, always.
But any of your odor that goes through that
It has some sort of a strange ability to prevent any wild animal that uses nose to detect human odors.
They cannot detect human odors anymore.
And I said, oh, you gotta be kidding.
And he said, no, I'm not.
And so I bought a, you could buy
this stuff bottled from one or two of these hunting stores in Texas and so I bought a little bottle and I decided that I was going to wait until the Christmas holidays when hopefully not many people would be in the chemistry building and I was going to run samples of this through a gas chromatograph and
You can use this pretty well to, if you can run a synthetic sample through and compare it to the behavior of the natural material, and they seem to be identical, and it's more complicated than that, but basically you can pretty well prove their identity.
Fortunately, I didn't have to do it.
I picked up a chemical abstract one day, about in September, right after school started.
Somebody had, everybody before that had thought that
The chemical in skunk scent was a compound called amylmercaptan.
Well, amylmercaptan happens to smell like skunk scent, but it isn't it.
Butylmercaptan, excuse me, butylmercaptan.
They put it in, mix it in natural gas.
That's what you smell if you've got a natural gas leak.
Well, it...
It turns out that the old boy that claimed that that was Butylmer Captain in 1896 collected a volume of this stuff, did a distillation of all things, and did some chemical tests on it, and it had the right boiling point and gave some of the correct tests that Butylmer Captain
gives, but isn't but butylmercaptan.
And it's something called crotylmercaptan, which is the same molecule minus two hydrogen atoms.
It has a carbon-to-carbon double bond in the middle.
Smell identical.
I defy any human nose to detect the difference.
But anyway, I went into the laboratory and made up a bunch of butylmercaptan.
I'd tried him.
They built them a captain on my deer, and they'd run off every time they'd smell it.
And I took some of this out there, and this animal was a captain, turned some loose, and I was sitting on a little hill.
And I looked over in just a few minutes, and I wasn't covered with anything, no brush around me.
Here came a doe, walked right out of the woods, and I think she was curious.
She smelled this odor, I think.
And she walked right up within about 20 yards of me and then walked all the way around me very slowly watching me all the time and then turned around and kind of shook her head and walked back into the woods.
And I knew that no deer.
What year was this about?
Well, this would have to be, let's see,
This would have to be around the early, late 50s, early 60s.
And I knew that no animal, no deer would ever do a thing like that.
I did lots of other tests on it, and it's incredible.
I've had deer walk
I shot a deer one day that I could almost hit with the end of my gun.
He walked right up to me, and this material was out, and he never did figure it out.
When did you begin to produce it and sell it commercially?
When I retired, I thought, well, it'd be fun.
Yeah, maybe somebody, this stuff is good enough, somebody would buy it because it's easy to handle.
The natural stuff, God, you can't get near it.
This stuff comes in two bottles, and they have...
The two solutions are both water solutions, and they have virtually no odor, but when you mix them, there's a chemical reaction that produces the final crotone or captain.
So you can create your odor anywhere you want to, and as long as you keep these bottles apart, you're not going to get into any trouble yourself.
And so Edith and I talked about maybe mixing some up in our garage and running an ad in the Houston Post and seeing if anybody would buy the stuff.
And then it suddenly occurred to me, the Houston Post sells a million people buying its paper.
I could get so much business that I wouldn't know how to handle it.
So there was a little company here in College Station, named the Miler Company, and they talked me into producing it and selling it for me.
And they turned out, did you know,
This guy was an associate dean of engineering, and you have probably— Not Skip Porter.
No.
He was in the Department of Aeronautical Engineering.
He was dean, associate dean, and thought he was an honest guy.
They were dishonest as they could be.
Uh-oh.
And they set up an operation designed to never make a profit.
How do you ever make a profit?
You pay all the employees enough money.
And the deal was that I had a patent on it, and the deal was that they would use my patent and pay me 5% gross sales royalty until they had gotten their investment back, and then they would go up to 10%.
They never got to 10%.
After seven years, my son-in-law, who's a CPA, came and demanded to see their books.
And he said, that's the crookedest bunch of people I've ever seen over there.
They're never going to make a profit.
So yeah, that's kind of the story of that.
And I'd do anything.
that I can use my scientific background to do.
I've got a little device.
Do you like to feed hummingbirds by any chance?
Do you really?
My wife very much does.
Well, you've got to have one of my devices.
I do some other strange things.
I've got a patent here that I got about a year ago.
And this is, it's on this device right here.
What is that device for?
This is the world's best device for dissolving gases in liquids.
It's the device I used at Monsanto in that last experiment that I told you about where I was dissolving phosgene.
If you have no gas, it's very soluble in liquid.
Who cares?
Who wants to dissolve gases and liquids?
Well, sewage treatment plants, for God's sake.
They need tremendous amounts of dissolved oxygen to allow these activated sludge microorganisms in there to destroy the organic matter.
Fish can't grow in fish-form ponds very well unless they're supplied with an adequate amount of oxygen.
This can be used in all kinds of other.
The best way to destroy bacteria, microorganisms, and swimming pools and spiles is not to put chlorine in.
or not to use chlorine in your drinking water.
You use ozone.
Ozone has about the same problem of dissolving in water as oxygen does.
This little device I created in the general mills one day.
I was trying to run a reaction.
that involved a gas that was one of the reactants.
I had to dissolve it in this liquid.
And when it dissolved, it reacted.
And it took me all day, nine hours, to run this reaction in only a small amount of material.
And I got irritated, and I went in the glassblowing room and made a little glass device that was much smaller than this.
But all it is is an inverted cone.
where the bottom is about half the diameter of the top, and there's a lot of holes now.
My original one had some tiny, tiny holes around this peripheral area.
I put it in this reaction mixture, and what took nine hours now took one hour, because I could simply dissolve the gas nine times faster.
I have never found any device on the market
commercial size or lab size, that will duplicate this.
But I had very tiny holes, about 1 16th inch holes and not very many of them in that original device.
I thought for years, God, if I could only figure a way to scale that thing up to large size, commercial size, without it plugging up,
by debris.
Any debris is going to plug up these tiny holes because this is a centrifugal pump.
When you turn it at high velocity, it simply attaches to an electric motor on a shaft here.
You turn this at fairly high velocity, this thing pumps water up inside here and throws out those holes.
And if you introduce some air along with it, now you're chopping big bubbles into tiny, tiny bubbles.
And the rate of solution of a gas and a liquid is directly proportional to the contact area between the two.
If you chop a bubble in two, you know what you do to the total surface?
You double it.
Every time you chop a bubble in two, you double the surface.
you would then double the rate of solution of whatever that material is.
And so all I was trying to do was to chop big bubbles into little bubbles, and all the other devices that are on the market do everything but that.
And so when I sent the application into the patent office,
The patent office looked at my drawings and said, oh, that thing is so simple.
The lady examiner said, somebody's done that before, a long time before, I'm sure.
I haven't found it yet, but I'm going to.
And after six and a half years, she gave me a patent.
And her excuse, wrote it in the letter, I'm being transferred to another division in the patent office and I'm cleaning off my desk.
And so I have the patent and we are now in the process.
I had it checked.
I did about 500 experiments out there in my garage over about six years on this thing, varying everything I could think of.
And since I have no background in engineering at all, I found $60,000 from a friend of mine to support an 18-month study, a 14-month study of this device.
seeing if they could duplicate, in Department of Chemical Engineering, Mark Holtzapel is a young chemical engineer that directed this work, seeing if they could duplicate my results.
And the results, I believe, I believe 80% of the energy used in a typical sewage treatment plant is used just to pump air.
15 to 20 percent of the oxygen in there is all that dissolves each time.
That's inefficiency of the worst kind.
They pump their air in eight feet deep in these big digestion tanks.
I can dissolve 80 percent in a one foot depth with this device.
And so I believe that if we, we're getting ready to try to figure out a way to do this, check this on a large scale.
University has a sewage treatment plant.
They would be, and they are,
did some additional design things that improved the behavior of this, and so we're taking out a supplemental patent, which will be 40% owned by A&M.
And so they're involved in this too, and the Office of Technology Transfer is now looking for companies
that might be interested in building and distributing these things.
I really do believe that I could put these in a typical sewage treatment plant and lower the cost
the actual total cost of sewage treatment to 50% of what it is now, and I have data that indicates it might be one-fourth of what it is now.
Now, I don't know whether that data will substantiate it or not, but that's the kind of crazy things I get involved with.
If I see something
that needs a solution, and I can use my scientific background, I tackle it, and I have them quit.
Well, that's great.
Let's see, I need to let you relax in a little bit, so I'm getting near the end.
Okay, that way.
Oh.
I've got just a few more.
Okay, sure.
If we could get all of the people out of your A&M experience back here, who would be the ones you would like to express appreciation to most?
Oh, Morgan, the first president that
He was a tremendous reason for me staying when I had great tendencies to leave.
That's President Morgan.
Paul Calloway was my personal friend, and when I lost my Welch grant, he went out of his way.
I was out of business in my research.
I took all my equipment.
In fact, it was interesting.
They said, you don't no longer have a Welsh grant and we want to take all of your permanent equipment and ship it to Texas Southern University.
I guess that was an extra slap because that's a black university.
And I did that and happened to ship it to a friend of mine down there, a chemist.
Yeah, Paul Callaway, no question.
Who else?
Well, Earl Rudder.
I couldn't leave him out at all.
Earl Rudder, in my opinion, stumbled and fumbled a lot, but really got the job done.
Wayne Hall, no question about it.
One of my best friends still.
Who else?
George Kreiss.
George and I get together and two things up every so often.
Is he still active and around?
No, he still lives here, but he's retired.
No, but I mean, he's still, so I could interview him.
Oh, yes.
You ought to look George Kreiss up.
He'd give you a good interview.
I haven't seen him in a good one.
Well, he's still here.
Let's see.
Do you have any advice if you were called upon to give advice to the A&M leadership today?
What counsel would you give them?
In all honesty, I don't normally think in those terms.
I still think like a scientist.
Well, what should A&M's scientific goals be?
What should they strive to attain?
They're getting close to what I think they're capable of being.
One of the top ten chemistry departments in the country.
And they're not there yet.
But they're not too far from there.
But you think that's an appropriate goal for them to strive for?
For me it sure would be.
I would be mighty proud to say I was once a part of that organization.
All right, then the last two things.
The first is a plea that if you have any A&M related materials, papers or anything that you ever want to dispose of, I would beg that you call the A&M archives because it is now well organized.
and that would be a place where they would be preserved for everyone's benefit forever.
I still have some of my old files that I had in my office and they're in the old Herman Heap Bible Chemistry building.
I had so much stuff I couldn't bring.
I've got books stacked up over there.
Don't know what to do with them.
I need to give them somebody.
I would beg you, give those books to the library.
They're welcome, Tom.
They're welcome.
You would need to let them know.
Then any of those files, it would be better for the archives to sort through them than for them to go to the dump.
I was worried about people just throwing things away.
I will not throw them away without sorting myself very carefully through them.
And then if I feel that they are of any value over there, I'll be glad to.
All right, then next to last question.
Next to last question.
If someone gave you a check for a million dollars,
and had only one condition on that sum, that you must pass it on to Texas A&M, but you can decide what use would be made of the money, what would you have A&M do if you had the capacity to give them a big gift?
What would you have them do with that gift?
There have been, in the process of doing this research for this patent, the chemistry department was exceedingly helpful for me.
They got chemicals and some electronic measuring equipment, oxygen meters and things like that for me, which I would have had a difficult time doing because they were buying it at a university discount.
The electrical engineering department lent me some of their equipment
I couldn't forget those two departments specifically.
This patent can be one of the most valuable patents that you've ever encountered.
It can be used if it's as good as it appears to be.
There's no sewage treatment plant in the country, in the world.
that could do without them because they can sell you so much money.
They're easy to make, very cheap.
And so I thought,
I'm too old to be a playboy anymore.
A million dollars or whatever.
I don't know what I would do with it.
But I have some things that I could do with them.
I will, whatever excess money that I make on this, and it could be a good million of dollars.
This is the best mixer you've ever seen.
It mixes more efficiently than any mixing device.
We took some water from one of the big chemical plants, some wastewater that had chemicals in there that they could not remove any more of.
but they didn't meet EPA requirements to dump it.
We cleaned, we had 8,000 gallons of water, a surrender mine used this, and cleaned it up in five minutes.
It was drinkable water.
It's got all kinds of applications.
I could make a lot of money.
I would take almost every bit of that and put it in a tax-free, tax-exempt foundation.
I would take all the proceeds from that and I have told my kids in detail about this.
was to be used for bright kids, poor kids who couldn't get an education otherwise.
I would say to that personally, amen.
Can't think of a better use for it.
no better investment can be made any way you measure the definition of investment.
And you, your background is so much like mine, you know what I'm talking about.
I wanted, I loved to learn as much as any kid you can imagine.
And yet I thought I could never get to where I wanted to go.
And now that I have, I gotta pay back some way.
And that's the best way.
Last question is related to that.
Looking back, what are your feelings about Texas A&M today?
As you look back, how do you feel about that institution?
You know, I'm a little bit schizophrenic since I have a degree from Baylor and two from Texas, and then I taught at A&M for about 25 years, but A&M is my school.
There's no question about that.
It has a different flavor than any of these other schools.
It's just different, that's all, and I like the difference.
I go on the campus, and kids fall out of their way trying to help me
get this in my vehicle and things like that.
It won't happen on other campuses.
I just like the general attitude that apparently is still going on around here.
I liked the, I didn't like what happened when the bonfire crashed, but.
That's right.
Let's quit there.